1 Ecological reality and mental maps
The Ancient Near East (to the extent considered in this book) covers a relatively confined area of roughly
2,000,000 km2
. It is therefore slightly smaller than Western Europe. Despite its limited size, this region
contains a variety of areas characterised by different types of land, rainfall levels, climates, vegetation, and
habitability levels (Figure 2.1). Mountain ranges can reach 3,500 m and 4,000 m in the Taurus, Pontic,
and Zagros Mountains, 5,000 m in Armenia (Mount Ararat), while the land depression of the Dead Sea
(–395 m below sea level) is the deepest in the world. The landscape of the Near East is thus composed of a
mixture of mountain ranges, alluvial plains, and desert plateaus. The Mediterranean climate of the western
coasts swiftly changes into the arid climate of the Syro-Arabian desert or, elsewhere, into a cold mountain
climate. Rivers, such as the Tigris and Euphrates, cross regions otherwise condemned to total aridity. Similarly, densely populated areas are in close contact with sparsely populated ones.
A common simplification of the geography of the Near East is that of the ‘Fertile Crescent’, namely, a
semicircle of fertile irrigated lands prone to agricultural and urban settlements extending from the Levant
to Syria and Mesopotamia. This area borders the Syro-Arabian desert to the south and the Anatolian,
Armenian, and Iranian highlands to the north. A closer look at this territory, however, reveals a more
complex situation, characterised by an intricate mixture of eco-regions. For instance, highlands contain
several basins that recreate, on a smaller scale, the characteristic features of the Fertile Crescent. Similarly,
fertile areas are interrupted by hills, mountains, and deserts, while arid plateaus present a constellation of
oases and wadis. This ecological variety is a structural trait of the Near East and is particularly important
from a historical point of view, since it entails a close interaction between areas with different potential.
For this reason, the concepts of interfaces, borders, and niches become useful tools for the understanding
of this network of relations.
An interface is the conjunction of two different zones. Through an interface, a range of products, people, expertise, technologies, and developments that belong to one area, but are not available in the other,
can be exchanged. The exchange process normally causes a visible change in expressions and valuations,
from which both parties gain mutual enrichment, comparison, and adjustment. This interaction, then,
contributed to the evolution of communities from their earliest stages. At times, phenomena resulting from
the intersection of two areas lead to the movement of human groups, such as in the case of seasonal migrations, very common in pastoral groups exploiting interfaces between mountains and plains, or fertile valleys
and arid lands. More often than not, sedentary communities take advantage of their convenient position
18
The geography of the Ancient Near East
near an interface, benefiting from its privileged access to different, yet complementary resources. In terms
of cultural development, then, the presence of many interfacing areas close to each other made the Near
East a highly dynamic environment.
While interfacing areas are an environmental phenomenon, borders are more historical and cultural
in nature, being a concept rather than a feature of the environment. A border zone is located along the
boundaries of a given community, beyond which – according to the members of that community – there
Figure 2.1 The environmental foundations. Above: Annual rainfall levels. Below: Natural (post-glacial) vegetation.
gg^ Mediterranean vegetation
mesic forest
temperate forest
Y//X forest steppe
•» C D steppe
• desert A
• alpine vegetation ^
Mediterranean Se a
TURKEY
IRAN
1
 SYRIA
IRAQ
ARABIA
LEBANON
ISRAEL -
EGYPT
v&r
\
19
The geography of the Ancient Near East
is nothing, or the generally inferior ‘other’. This is an appealing area for its raw materials, accessed through
unequal exchange, or military conquest and imperialistic expansion. While an interfacing area works both
ways, a border is univocal, being a point of view or, better, an idea.
An interface is relatively stable and centred on its natural resources and their exploitation. On the contrary, a border can be moved, becoming the object of outward expansion if its central community is strong.
However, a border is also prone to being violated and removed if the ‘chaotic’ forces from the outside
prevail over the stability of the community within that border. In addition to that, there can be internal
borders within the community itself that can become, in the course of time, ‘invisible frontiers’. These
frontiers are untraceable on maps, but can only be detected in the community’s degree of cultural diversity.
‘Invisible frontiers’ can include linguistic and religious frontiers, and differences in modes of production
and lifestyle, as well as social and political structures.
The niche (ecological or cultural) constitutes a completely different concept, which stresses the value of
well-defined and relatively isolated zones with their own social structures, resources, and modes of production. Niches can be small territorial units (a valley or an oasis) whose impact seems minor when compared
to the large-scale economic and historical processes that we know today. However, the processes affecting
the history of the Near East were of a much smaller scale than the processes we see today. Therefore, the
development and location of human settlements, the accumulation of surplus, craftsmanship, and trade had
a strong influence on the history of the area despite their relatively limited scale.
Consequently, a secluded and protected area, well connected to its surroundings, could experience a
more effective and productive development than a larger, but fragmented area. The latter could only arise
after the development of a more organised and efficient network of communication, a more compact
population, and a more pressing need for imported materials and resources. The optimal size of a niche is
therefore prone to changes in response to its historical context. For instance, the oasis of Jericho was an
optimal niche for the Neolithic period, while Assyria, which included a large number of cities, became an
optimal niche in the Iron Age.
Through this articulation in niches, interfaces and borders, the Ancient Near East acquires a considerable degree of complexity. This explains (as will be explored in detail in the analysis of its history) its
varying degrees of development, its versatility in terms of political structures, and its constant cultural
interactions. However, in the case of a general overview of Near Eastern history, this complexity also
runs the risk of becoming an inextricable mess. Simplifications can therefore illuminate this complex
picture in a viable and powerful way, providing clarifications and explanations for many aspects of the
history of the Near East. The protagonists of the history of the Near East themselves already put forward similar ideological simplifications of this complex reality through their own worldview. Some of
these ideologies were to be picked up by modern historiography, at times unaware of their ideological
nature.
This is the case of the most powerful of these ideas, namely, the one that sees the Near East as a contraposition of centre and periphery. The centre constitutes the settled and civilised space. Its ideal nucleus is
the city (with its main temple or palace), which is at the heart of a network of irrigated fields and villages.
The periphery is the area surrounding the centre. This area is characterised by steppes or mountains, and
a sparse, nomadic population of shepherds, refugees, and robbers. Being further away from the centre, the
periphery is less inhabited and acts as a mere supplier of natural resources such as timber, metals, and semiprecious stones. Similar ‘mental maps’ can be easily found in ancient sources (Figure 2.2), such as in the
case of Gudea (ca. 2100 bc), ruler of the city of Lagash. He saw his own city as the centre of the world, and
the temple of the god Ningirsu as the centre of Lagash. The materials needed for the construction of the
temple came from the surrounding areas. This periphery was seen as a series of territories each providing a
specific type of metal or wood, and each linked to the central plain by a river that conveniently brought the
raw materials to the centre. In this way, the surrounding lands were seen as being provided with a purpose
they would have lacked otherwise.
20
The geography of the Ancient Near East
Modern historiography has implemented a similar point of view, envisioning the Ancient Near East
as centred in the Lower Mesopotamian plain. This area had the largest fields and urban settlements, and
was surrounded by sparsely populated steppes and mountains. The latter provided raw materials and were
culturally and politically dependent on the centre. It is clear that this kind of simplification can be fairly
Figure 2.2 Maps from the Ancient Near East.
Plan of an agricultural settlement
(from Nuzi, ca. 2300 BC).
To the right: Plan of the city of
Nippur (from Nippur, ca. IS00
BC).
To the left: Map of the world
(from Sippar, ca. 2500 BC).
21
The geography of the Ancient Near East
acceptable from the viewpoint of the centre, but cannot be accepted for the periphery. In fact, in terms of
written sources, this was a typically Mesopotamian worldview.
However, the communities living elsewhere also felt at the centre of their own world, which they
organised, with more or less success, in response to their own needs. They therefore protected their
identity even at the cost of drastically changing the characteristics and traditions of other communities.
Consequently, this opposition of centre and periphery runs the risk of forcing modern historiography to
focus too much on Mesopotamia (clearly visible in the modern use of the term ‘Greater Mesopotamia’,
indicating Mesopotamia and the surrounding regions). This approach, however, flattens out the unique
traits of the surrounding communities and regions, the diverse and reciprocal nature of cultural interactions, and the complexity of trade, exchange, and politics. Despite still using, at least partly, a similar point
of view on the Near East, it is necessary to adjust it in its articulation. Therefore, one must take into consideration the diversity of the territory and its diachronic development, locating the many rising centres
that were emerging through time, and bearing in mind the subjectivity and relativity of the concept of
periphery.
From a purely descriptive point of view, a strong complementarity between the areas with high concentrations of people and those rich in raw materials remains. This makes the opposition between centre
and periphery a useful, yet simplified, model. In fact, population density is directly correlated to agriculture
and is therefore found in fertile areas (i.e. plains), especially if irrigated. Alluvial plains consequently attract
the majority of cultivations and urban settlements. However, such areas lack a wide range of raw materials, such as forests for wood, pasturelands for wool, metals and stone. These resources are predominantly
located on the mountains and semi-arid plateaus, areas that are unsuitable for urban settlements and agricultural activities.
These two complementary areas experience an unequal level of exchange. The periphery, rich in
resources, provides goods to the densely populated centre. In turn, the centre provides a return in the
form of ideologies and cultural influence. Since history is concerned with human groups, this unbalanced
perspective favouring the densely populated areas and marginalising the areas providing material resources
is both reasonable and inevitable. However, if taken too far, this dichotomy would result in a loss of the
overall balance between the two, and an impoverishment of the wealth of different experiences that shaped
the history of the Near East.
So far, we have considered the Near East as a complex environment in geographical terms, but seemingly stable through time. This apparent stability, however, is only a rough approximation. It is true that
the climate of the Near East in its 10,000 years of history was similar to today’s climate, indicating that the
whole history of the area developed within the same interglacial phase. However, within this phase there
have been medium-sized fluctuations in rainfall levels and temperature. The latter had a particularly strong
impact on areas with critical habitability levels, thus shifting the borders of a number of eco-regions (such
as the western edge of the Syro-Arabian Desert, located between Syria and the Transjordan plateau) and
causing fluctuations between the presence of sedentary and transhumant communities. Modern historiography is very aware of the historical impact of these fluctuations, and has often considered climate factors
as the main reason for regional collapses and migrations of people. However, the effects of these climatic
factors were not always as immediate as is often believed.
Be that as it may, the most significant factors influencing the changing landscape of the Near East
were human activities. At times, these activities led to a savage exploitation of certain resources, kickstarting often irreversible processes of decline. In this regard, the process of deforestation was particularly
damaging. Its impact can be noted when comparing maps reconstructing the original forested areas with
their extension today. From the Neolithic period, the creation of farmlands and pasturelands through the
removal of forests constituted a factor that has deeply marked the history of the Near East. The first acts
of deforestation from that time were mainly aimed at clearing limited portions of land in a virtually intact
territory. They were followed by the deforestation of wider areas in the Bronze Age. In fact, the needs of
22
The geography of the Ancient Near East
urban centres led to the deforestation of mountain forests for building purposes, as well as the remainders
of forests on the plains for agricultural purposes.
In the Iron Age, the agro-pastoral exploitation of the mountains and hills increased. Deforested areas
were now used for intensive grazing, causing an irreversible damage to the land both in terms of vegetation
and soil depth. On the irrigated plains, interventions were mainly focused on the construction of canals, the
regulation of water flow, and the drainage and diffusion of water. These interventions first affected specific
areas, then vast portions of the territory. Consequently, the irrigation system of the Near East experienced
various stages of growth and decline (especially in Lower Mesopotamia), including the retransformation of
vast areas into marshes. Moreover, the intensive cultivation of the land led to a salinisation of the soil. Due
to these constant fluctuations, it is necessary to reconstruct the landscape of each historical period analysed,
at least as far as possible. While in certain cases the ancient landscape is very similar to the current one, in
others it is drastically different, especially if the modern landscape is the outcome of decline and desertification processes, or modern interventions in the land.
In this regard, paleobotanic and palynologic data play an essential role in a historical reconstruction
of the Near Eastern landscape. This evidence allows us to identify the most common plant species (both
natural and cultivated) in the area, and their fluctuations. In addition to that, archaeological evidence provides useful insights on the chronology of human interventions, such as the construction of canal systems,
agricultural terraces, wells, and so on. Written sources and depictions are normally given great importance
for a reconstruction of the landscape, despite the fact that this evidence is intrinsically biased. Administrative texts are far more reliable and play a fundamental role in the understanding of agriculture and livestock
in the Near East, often providing us with quantitative data. From a linguistic point of view, however,
this kind of evidence is difficult to interpret, since an exact and reliable translation of ancient terminology
(botanical, zoological and technological) is not always available.
Literary accounts and depictions portray a highly deformed reality, both culturally and ideologically,
and require careful interpretation. The landscapes presented are usually misrepresented, both in terms of
size and of exotic and unusual features. They often present utopic connotations, depicting or describing
landscapes which were an interpretation of real landscapes, with strong political, celebrative, or normative
overtones. They consequently do not faithfully describe a landscape, but show how this landscape was
seen. These literary and iconographic landscapes therefore belong more to the realm of art and literature
than to a solid reconstruction of a specific environment. Nonetheless, if appropriately interpreted, they can
provide useful information that can be used for a historical reconstruction.
2 Population
The environmental diversity of the Near East caused its population to be distributed more unevenly than
today. Communities mainly settled in the alluvial plains and the intermontane niches. In some phases, they
even moved into vast hilly areas and plateaus, and avoided the mountains and steppes, which were accessible on a seasonal basis, and by smaller, nomadic communities. The alluvial plains themselves were not
evenly populated and were inhabited insofar as the land was cultivated and free from marshes. Therefore,
even within these densely populated areas, the discontinuity of population levels remains, with irrigated
patches of land (cultivated by sedentary and even urbanised communities) emerging from a territory potentially exploitable, but largely left uncultivated.
Overall, there are three principles worth bearing in mind. First of all, the amount of land was higher
than the number of people living in it. Second, agriculture depended on the availability of water. Third,
human intervention was the main factor allowing the development of infrastructures for the exploitation
of land and water. Moreover, human intervention was proportional to population density and the level of
socio-political organisation. These three core elements – land, water, and labour – strongly influenced each
other. Consequently, population density was influenced by the availability of food, but was also the main
23
The geography of the Ancient Near East
factor causing food production. Therefore, population growth was a gradual and difficult process, and no
single factor could be responsible for it without the intervention of other contributing factors. Similarly,
the process could be put to a halt or even reverted in case of a crisis.
The spatial discontinuity of the population was parallel to a diachronic discontinuity in time. The
archaeological evidence shows that the history of each settlement was characterised by an alternation
between phases of construction and destruction, of occupation and definitive, or prolonged, abandonment; this evidence makes it possible to compile the specific histories of each settlement into a regional
and demographic history. This allows for a better understanding of local alternations between phases of
development, during which positive factors (such as production and reproduction) significantly prevailed,
and phases of decline, or even collapse, during which negative factors prevailed.
Crises were often caused by natural phenomena, such as earthquakes, droughts, epidemics and floods,
which could not be averted, at least considering the levels of technological development of the period.
However, apart from these natural causes, which were outside human control, there were crucial human
factors. These constituted effective development strategies, even though the people implementing them
were largely unaware of them. First, there is a strictly quantitative factor. A small community has fewer
chances to survive over a prolonged period of time, being more vulnerable to a violent crisis. Moreover,
a small community is less able to maintain its cultural and physical bonds over time, such as in the case of
marriage incompatibilities, endogamy, the unsuitable marriageable age of its members, and so on. In this
regard, a larger community is better equipped to cope with minor crises, being affected by them, but not
destroyed. A larger community therefore has the ability to recover from minor crises, while at the same
time providing its members with a wider range of choices and more frequent adjustments. However, in
order to function properly, a larger community has to be structurally and socially complex. Therefore,
a larger community is more exposed to dangerous and unrecoverable crises, affecting those not directly
involved in food production in particular.
Second, there is a strictly strategic factor, based on a choice between two possible models. One developmental model is slow – almost imperceptible – but safer, being more inclined towards safeguarding the
community, rather than quantitative growth and qualitative improvements. This model is generally found
in small agricultural and pastoral communities (such as villages and semi-nomadic groups). The model is
centred on subsistence rather than progress, and it aims at maintaining its reserve of resources (land, livestock, and so on) virtually intact. There is, however, an accelerated model, primarily found in urban settlements. This model focuses on the accumulation of surplus and the specialisation of labour, with a marked
tendency towards the increase and diversification of resources. In order to achieve this, the model requires
the maximisation of profits from the available resources, and thus the over-exploitation of its means of
production and labour: decimating herds, over-irrigating lands, cultivating without interruptions (causing
soil salinisation and land degradation). These measures lead to the expectation of amounts of labour and
food surplus that, if excessive, can become detrimental. This second model allowed the greatest achievements of the history of the Near East (cities with temples and palaces, the development of craftsmanship,
archives, city-walls, canals, and so on). However, it was also the ultimate reason for the dramatic collapses
and disasters in the Near East, caused by projects that expected too much from the scarce and variable
human and material resources available at the time.
An important factor that played a major role in this progressive model was war, understood here as an
extreme means to obtain resources and to expand one’s sphere of political control. Military campaigns
always have a negative effect on the population (bloodshed and lower birth rates) and on production
(destruction of settlements and farmlands). However, through the annexation and re-organisation of conquered lands, war can have positive effects, though strictly in the sense of allowing the enlargement of a
community and the integration of different territories. These effects respond to the two factors mentioned
above, namely, the establishment of boundaries and of a certain pace of development. In terms of demography and production, it is clear that war is convenient to the winner and detrimental to the loser. Therefore,
24
The geography of the Ancient Near East
it is necessary to consider the effects of war over people and lands from both sides, and evaluate whether
its immediate negative impact is compensated through time and contributes to the overall progress of the
defeated community.
In general, the first model can be represented on a chart with a line that slowly but continuously
increases through time. On the other hand, the fast-paced model can be represented with a line that rises
rapidly, but abruptly drops from time to time. Considering the peaks reached by this second line, it is
undeniable that they are far higher than the ones achieved in the first model. At the same time, considering
the lowest points of the second line, they roughly coincide with the ones of the first model. This is because
phases of accelerated development (generally urban, political, and economically and militarily aggressive)
cannot continue indefinitely in time. Their eventual collapse is a structural aspect of their existence and is
not accidental, but lays the groundwork for new phases of development.
It remains true, however, that peaks of development in the second model – and it has to be pointed
out that we tend to overestimate them, due to their better attestation both in archaeological and written
evidence – are rare and isolated in time and space. Overall, then, the average demographic development
of the Near East follows the slow pace of the first model. This slower rate of growth is due to two factors:
1) the high infant mortality rate, which virtually cancelled out the high birth rates (also because the high
birth rates were aimed at compensating for infant mortality); 2) an average life expectancy so low as to
affect fertility rates. In a community in which the average life expectancy is 25 or 30 years, a couple’s main
problem is whether or not they will be able to give birth to enough children. In this way, they would be
able to leave at least two of them alive long enough to be able to generate offspring themselves (since many
of them would have died in infancy). Otherwise, a community would eventually die out. The solution
found was to lower the marriageable age of women, in order to benefit the most from their fertility, and
to balance endogamy with exogamy, monogamy, and polygamy, in order to make full use of the range of
marriageable individuals available.
However, these social and cultural measures could not completely remove the physical and biological
risks linked to childbirth. The latter was determined by two main factors, namely, health and diet. Infant
and maternal mortality, frequent epidemics, and famines were insurmountable plagues for the Near Eastern
levels of health and diet. Therefore, the already low and discontinuous population density of the Near East
was further reduced by short life expectancy and poor quality of life, which was worsened by malnutrition and endemic diseases (gastro-enteric illnesses in particular, due to the low water quality of rivers and
wells).
In the Near East, then, people had a short life span, lived badly, with little food and many illnesses.
Consequently, they produced at rates and in quantities that may seem insignificant to us, but were the
reflection of bad health and diet. However, given the achievements of these communities despite their
low quality of life, the frequent crises affecting them are not as surprising as their ability to even reach
such levels of growth. The accomplishments of these people with their cities and temples, as well as their
high-quality artefacts and technological developments, are the result of a tenacious fight for survival and a
forceful sourcing of food and labour. These efforts should be attributed to the ruling socio-political structures, which managed to control the population both physically and ideologically.
Finally, it is important to note the anthropological and linguistic features of the Near East. In terms
of anthropology (as far as the available evidence can provide us with diachronic data), the stability of the
population is striking and is an aspect still present today. This characteristic indicates that the Near East
began to be populated very early on, and from the Neolithic period onwards experienced considerable
internal movements, such as seasonal and permanent migration. The invasions and migrations emphasised by historians of the nineteenth century (ad) must have been quite modest in scale. They therefore
influenced genetic diversity only marginally, allowing the leading human species to survive. The impact
of migratory movements was more cultural than genetic, especially in the case of movements of elite
groups (i.e. specialised military, technological, religious, or administrative groups). The latter were both
25
The geography of the Ancient Near East
culturally and politically influential, but too limited in size compared to the rest of the population, made
of sedentary agro-pastoral communities.
A similar overview can be gathered from the distribution of languages in the Near East. Languages are
crucial cultural phenomena, being both transferable and versatile. From a linguistic point of view, then, the
earliest written attestations document the presence of Semitic groups, located on the concave side of the
Fertile Crescent, where they live to this day. These groups were to stay within this area throughout their
existence, spreading all the way to the Taurus and Zagros Mountains, but not beyond these boundaries.
Within this compact Semitic area, however, a variety of Semitic languages developed with considerable
differences and in a variety of dialects. This is the case of the ancient Eblaite and Proto-Akkadian languages,
which were slowly replaced by waves of Amorite, Aramaic, and Arabic. By the third millennium bc, the
borders of this Semitic area were already established. These were not much different from the ones that
separate Arabic-speaking people from those speaking Turkish and Iranian languages today.
Populations speaking Indo-European languages can be found outside the Fertile Crescent, especially
in Anatolia and the Iranian plateau. These populations, which were slowly but progressively spreading to
the south, managed to move into those intermediary zones standing between them and the Semitic area.
In these intermediary zones, people initially spoke a variety of different languages (neither Semitic, nor
Indo-European), partly related to each other, such as Sumerian, Elamite, Hurrian, and others that are not
sufficiently documented in the sources. However, this linguistic buffer zone was destined to disappear,
and was slowly assimilated and replaced by the two predominant linguistic groups (although these other
languages lasted longer in Armenia and on the Transcaucasian highlands).
As can be seen, these changes in the ethno-linguistic groups of the area were long-term phenomena
affecting the Near East as a whole. The individual migrations attested in the sources were cultural phenomena rather than movements of large ethnical groups. Substantial changes in the Near East, from the
assimilation of entire groups, to the shift of linguistic boundaries, and the rise of internal subdivisions, took
place without the full awareness of the people experiencing them. Consequently, they remain undocumented in the sources. However, scholars have too often drawn simplistic connections between the available documentation and these changes.
3 Technological developments
In the traditional stereotypes regarding the Ancient Near East there seems to be a contradiction between the
image of stagnation and inventiveness. On the one hand, there is the old-fashioned view of the East in general
as being always the same socio-political context determined to suppress originality and creativity, a situation
that only changed through its later contacts with the West. Leaving aside the theoretical foundations of this
stereotype and considering any current book on Ancient Near Eastern history, one gets the impression that
throughout its long history nothing changed in terms of lifestyle and technology. In other words, one gets the
impression that no one would even realise if the book happened to mix up a part regarding Sargon of Akkad
with one concerning the Assyrian king Sargon II. The difficulty of understanding in the form of a sequence
the rise and fall of dynasties, the construction and destruction of cities, and the appearance and assimilation of
entire populations, gives a sense of cyclicality and repetitiveness to Near Eastern history, which seems not to
have benefited from the significant cultural changes (from ideology to technology) taking place in the area.
On the other hand, there is still an idea of the Near East as the birthplace of many fundamental techniques and technologies of the Ancient World: from food production to writing, city and state organisation, metallurgy, architecture, and so on. Therefore, by tracing the history of each technique, one can find
its Near Eastern ‘origin’. This makes this region the ‘cradle’ of civilisation, the birthplace of all cultural
factors constituting, with modifications and improvements, the core of our own culture.
Both points of view are highly idealised. First, the myth of oriental stagnation exists as a counterpart of
the myth of that ‘Greek miracle’ which gave birth to Western culture, and which was later used to justify
26
The geography of the Ancient Near East
colonialism. Second, the myth of the Near East as the ‘cradle’ of civilisation emphasises our position at
the end of a long process of change and continuity, and at the forefront of world progress. A partial and
approximate contextualisation of these two myths thus results in a view of the Near East as a creative and
propulsive force in history, yet confined to material culture and placed in a remote past. Moreover, the
Near East appears as constituted by a creative phase followed by a phase of immobilisation, when established practices were maintained, but were made ineffective and unsuitable as a basis for further progress
by magic and despotic attitudes.
A more radical and less biased interpretation of the technological and cultural developments of the Near
East allows a more balanced overview of its history (Table 2.1). The Near East is characterised by many
areas and environments prone to innovation and development, and suitable phases for the development of
more durable systems. The technological developments of the Near East are remarkable, but constituted
a process that took place over millennia. This is the case not only because technological developments
required a long time to be implemented, but also because demographic and economic conditions caused
the majority of resources to be directed towards subsistence. Moreover, crises, sudden collapses, and abrupt
interruptions (both in time and space) constituted another element slowing down the process. Alongside
these, there were reciprocal influences between different cultural entities and political, ideological, religious, and production systems. Religious ideologies (from the magical interpretation of events and healing
practices to the belief in salvation in the afterlife) were closely linked to the lack of human control over
natural phenomena. However, they slowly began to influence technological developments, the monopolisation of resources, and so on.
There are essentially three innovative phases in the history of the Near East. The first one covers a long
Table 2.1 Technological progress in the Ancient Near East
8000 Farming Agriculture Architecture/craftsmanship Written records
7000
goats, sheep,
pigs
grains, legumes unbaked bricksplaster, drainage first signs
6000
cattle,
donkeys
hammered metal, weaving (wool)
handmade pottery
5000 linen first stamp seals
4000
irrigation in the alluvial
plains, animal-drawn
ploughs
molten metal
3500
vine, olive tree, date
palm
arsenical copper cretula + signs
3000
extensive irrigation wheel-made pottery, bronze cylinder seals, weights
and measurements,
logographic writing
2500 syllabic writing
2000 baked bricks
1500 horse glass
1000
camel,
dromedary
mountain irrigation
terraces
iron alphabet
500
cotton
27
The geography of the Ancient Near East
period of its early history and took place slightly earlier than the period considered in this book. It is the
so-called Neolithic Revolution, when fundamental techniques for food production (agriculture and farming), the necessary instruments (tools and containers), and the earliest forms of housing (houses, villages,
and farms) were first developed. The second phase is the Urban Revolution of the Early Bronze Age. This
phase saw the development of recording techniques (which culminated with the development of writing), the introduction of specialised labour (such as full-time craftsmanship) and mass production, as well
as the development of cities and the rise of the concept of the state. The third phase took place between
the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age, when a number of innovations, such as the alphabet and
the increasing use of iron were developed. This led to a sort of ‘democratisation’ of the former palace and
temple economies, and a stronger presence of socially and geographically marginal areas compared to the
former supremacy of the city. The intermediary phases between these innovative phases, however, were
not characterised by stagnation: after all, innovations never appear all of a sudden, but always follow a slow
and difficult path of development.
In any case, it is clear that the central and innovative role of the Near East in world history needs to be
re-defined and toned down. The Neolithic Revolution affected a vast region over a long period of time
(including areas outside the borders of the Near East), and evolved in a variety of ways. The Urban Revolution brought Lower Mesopotamia to be imitated (though in different ways) by other centres elsewhere.
Finally, in the Iron Age, at the beginning of the first millennium bc, the Near East began to interact with,
re-elaborate, and provide influential innovations to a wider network of cultural contacts. Therefore, if
there was an imaginary line of development marking areas particularly prone to technological developments, this line would go from the interfacing areas between complementary eco-regions in the Neolithic
period, to the urban centres as hubs for the innovations of the Bronze Age (the rise of temple and palaces
in the production and political and administrative control of communities). Finally, the line would reach
the trade routes (through land and water), which were the privileged locations for the elaboration and diffusion of the technological innovations of the Iron Age.
This line of development cuts across the opposition and complementarity of different working environments, which were the main areas for the diffusion of technological innovations. In the initial stages
of urbanisation, palace workshops constituted privileged areas for these developments. This was due to
the availability of specialised workforce able to work full-time, and the influx of raw materials through
tributes and long distance trade. Therefore, the presence of institutions such as the palace (or the temple)
laid those unprecedented bases for the development of specialised technologies, more refined and suitable
for large-scale production.
However, outside these workshops there were other, more marginal (both geographically and socially),
environments able to develop their own techniques. They therefore became potential reservoirs for more
politically and economically centralised systems. This happened whenever changes in inter-regional relations, social situations, processes of acculturation, or de-culturation, took place. Placing these (and other)
factors within the wider network of interactions of the Near East is a difficult task, one that is far from being
fully understood and remains largely to the imagination. It is not possible to synthesise here the various
theories about this issue, although certain points will be mentioned within the treatment of the history of
specific communities. In order to clarify the kind of approach that should be used, it may be worth considering briefly the example of animal husbandry.
The Neolithic period saw the slow development of the domestication of several animal species (including experiments later abandoned because they were too difficult) by village communities. This activity was
pursued for a variety of necessities, from food to textile production, and support in cultivation and transport. However, this process took place at a household and village level. In the early stages of urbanisation,
production became an activity overseen by larger institutions. This led to a steep rise in the farming of
sheep and goats for textile production, the development of mechanisms for the concentration and conservation of products for large urban centres, and the organisation of production units and draught animals for
28
The geography of the Ancient Near East
transport and agriculture. In the Late Bronze Age, the larger urban centres assimilated new species of animals, namely, the horse (in the Middle Bronze Age), the camel, and the dromedary. These had been previously domesticated in marginal areas, but gradually became essential for military and commercial needs.
A second example is the development of metalworking. The Chalcolithic period saw the development
of basic casting techniques and the first alloys, though on a village level and in modest quantities. With the
rise of urbanisation, bronze gradually became the preferred metal, and began to be produced on a larger
scale in palace workshops. The higher demand for bronze led to a sharp increase in long-distance trade
(supervised by the palace administration) for the metals needed to produce it (primarily copper and tin).
The situation also led to a particular focus on metalwork, in order to meet the demands of the palace and
the army. Finally, with the collapse of palace workshops and inter-palatial trade of copper and tin at the end
of the Bronze Age, iron emerged as a ‘democratising’ metal. This was due to the fact that its production
required less equipment and the raw material was more readily available.
Many other examples can be mentioned. If one could place them in columns next to each other, they
would emphasise, despite their unique traits, the basic common characteristics and trends of each historical
phase. However, the Near East did not have a homogeneous history of technological development. On
the contrary, this process was marked by strong regional diversity, different socio-economic contexts, and a
diachronic variability between areas. Despite the crises and collapses that took place throughout the history
of the Near East, the main tendency was towards an improvement of the ability to master the surrounding
environment, and to benefit from the scarce resources available.
Two strategies thus coexisted: one towards the selection and concentration of techniques, and the other
towards a diversification of experimentation. Depending on the socio-political and economic situation of
a given community, the two strategies interacted and alternatively prevailed over each other. Overall, the
adaptations applied on Near Eastern technologies once they were borrowed elsewhere were not higher
than the adaptations they had already experienced throughout the previous three millennia of their existence. The technological variable is therefore neither univocal nor independent, and has to be linked to
other variables that might have influenced a given community. However, technology remains of primary
importance in the understanding of the factors influencing historical events, from political and military
changes, to the development of economic systems, and the establishment of social relations.
4 Modes of production
For a long time, the interpretation of socio-economic issues in the Near East has remained largely pragmatic.
For instance, it avoided delving into the whole debate (once central to the study of ancient history) between
‘modernists’ and ‘primitivists’ – in other words, between the supporters of a reconstruction through concepts
and models taken from modern economics, and the supporters of a reconstruction based on elementary forms
of socio-economic developments. In the last fifty years, however, the preference for theoretical models has
become more popular. Previously, there was a period characterised by a stronger support for the ‘Asiatic
mode of production’ model developed by Marx, and/or Polányi’s ‘marketless trading’ model. They both
were non-modernist models that were historical without being primitivist. Then, classical economics experienced a revival, supporting the idea of the universality of economic concepts. In all these periods, prevailing
interpretative trends were highly influenced by current political affairs and ideologies.
Admittedly, the so-called ‘laws’ of economics were developed from a relatively limited set of historical
evidence and for other historical contexts. In fact, they are based on concepts such as markets and currencies that are quite anachronistic when applied to the Near East. Nonetheless, Near Eastern modes of production and exchange were considerably sophisticated and not directly comparable to elementary systems
of exchange. It is therefore necessary to reconstruct operational models specifically designed around the
societies considered, taking into consideration their uniqueness and complexity.
Regarding modes of production, it has to be borne in mind that the Marxist model concerns a
29
The geography of the Ancient Near East
capitalistic type of economy (with its formative and transformative processes). Therefore, when it was
applied to ancient economies it was through few, largely unsubstantiated, references. In fact, nineteenth
century researchers only had indirect and largely irrelevant evidence on the Ancient Near East. Therefore,
theories on the Asiatic mode of production and its relations to other modes (such as the slave and feudal
ones) belong to the realm of Marxist studies rather than to the study of the Near East.
What remains a useful concept in the context of the Near East is the ‘mode of production’ itself. This
model, though maybe out-dated for the analysis of complex economies like the current one, can provide
useful insights into less complex economies. Certain aspects remain particularly important such as the identification of types of ownership of the means of production (especially in terms of land), the relationship
between means of production and workforce, the size of production units, and the accumulation of surplus. It is the highly variable combination of these basic factors that characterises what Marx defined as the
foundation of the economic structure of society. Within it, many ‘modes of production’ (which interact
following patterns of hegemony and subordination), systems of exchange, forms of consumption (as well as
accumulation, ostentation, and destruction) can be detected. Modes of production and systems of exchange
are, however, only ideal constructions, mere interpretative tools. The study of the economic formation of
society therefore remains a historical reconstruction, concrete and variable both in time and space.
The most influential modes of production that can be found in the Near East are the palace and the
household models. The first came about through the Urban Revolution, and is characterised by the rise
of the ‘great organisations’ (the temple and the palace) as centres of production, and the servile state of
the producers of food towards those holding political and administrative control. Moreover, this mode of
production led to the strong and dynamic specialisation of labour, a centripetal and redistributive influx
of goods, and the resulting hierarchic distribution of sectors related to production. The second mode, the
household, is instead residual of the Neolithic period, when the workforce and the owners of the means
of production were the same people. Moreover, the household model features the absence of a full-time
labour specialisation (or, better, it is still unstructured) and the relatively equal status of its members and
sectors. The two models interact with each other in a clear ‘hegemony vs. subordination’ kind of dynamic,
since the palace model could not exist without the household one. The latter was in fact gradually absorbed
and restructured (due to its relation to the palace), thus losing its former independence and autonomy.
The establishment of these two models, and of the hegemonic character of the palace model, does not
eliminate the problem of the diachronic evolution of economic development and of the existence of other
(more marginal) modes of production. This issue will have to be dealt with in the following chapters. For
now, it may be sufficient to mention the fact that the two models evolved through mutual influences.
Moreover, regional variations and the existence of other modes of production constitute an alternative
development strategy, partly influenced by the specific context in which they developed. The main developmental current of the fertile plains was influenced by factors such as urbanisation, irrigation, the cultivation of grains and the farming of sheep and goats, organised trade, palace workshops, and the religious
nature of political organisation. However, there were environments and strategies for production that were
more centred on the exploitation of local resources (such as metal, wood and semiprecious stones), transhumance, and rain-fed agriculture. These were usually managed by communal groups ruled by an elite.
The idea of ‘modes of production’ as theoretical concepts that find their concrete application in the
way they interact with each other (not just in the realm of production) in a specific historical context is
even truer in the case of systems of exchange. In this regard, Karl Polányi’s view of ancient economies
has strongly influenced the study of the Near East. This is due to his definition of integrative models of
reciprocity, redistribution, and markets. It is quite clear that the concept of reciprocity is best suited for a
household mode of production, while redistribution is closely linked to palace administration. However,
a market-centred analysis continues to be unsuitable for the type of economies found in the Ancient Near
East, with the exception of the relatively early emergence of certain elements related to market economies
in certain areas.
30
The geography of the Ancient Near East
Just as with modes of production, so with systems of exchange the redistributive system prevailed. This
system displays an application of reciprocal relations mainly in marginal areas, with the marked exception
of inter-state commercial exchanges. Nonetheless, it is clear that these models are more interpretative than
descriptive. Consequently, they belong to the study of ideologies rather than the study of economies. In
fact, depending on its value and purpose, the same act of exchange can belong to both the reciprocal and
redistributive model. Apart from its political, administrative, ceremonial, and other purposes, which only
marked the way in which it was pursued, exchange always constituted a strictly economic reality (also in
terms of exchanged commodities and technologies). Unfortunately, this fundamental role can only be
understood from quantitative evaluations, with regards to which our sources are far too limited and selective (except for trade in the Old Assyrian period).
In this regard, through the scientific analysis of materials found in ancient sites, the archaeological evidence
is increasingly supporting the study of the materials both for issues of production and exchange. This allows for
a more precise establishment of their origins, their structure, and diffusion. Moreover, the analysis of paleobotanical and paleozoological evidence (crucial for a reliable reconstruction of agricultural and farming activities),
as well as of materials (crucial for the reconstruction of technologies and trading networks), is much more
common for the study of prehistoric and proto-historic phases. However, it is underestimated for historical
phases, as if the availability of written sources would make scientific data less relevant. Naturally, the contrary
is true: only through the comparison of the entire set of available evidence will it become possible to gain a
reliable understanding of the communities considered. The analysis of sources and administrative texts remains
in fact relatively abstract if we cannot find out to what they were referring. Similarly, scientific evidence
becomes difficult to contextualise historically if the ancient systems used at the time cannot be recovered.
5 Ideologies
A historical reconstruction of the ecology, demography, technology, and modes of production of the
Ancient Near East follows the slow pace of development of macro-phenomena and the medium pace of
social ones. It does not, however, follow the fast pace of the events that characterised its history. The available documentation (environmental, archaeological, and textual) does not allow a thorough understanding
of the history of the Near East. This is because its evidence does not document every aspect of ancient life.
Nonetheless, the knowledge of influential individuals, dynasties, or battles remains useful for the establishment of a chronological framework. Through the latter, it becomes possible to link equally historically
important long-term phenomena shaping the Near East, especially since they can be linked to each other
according to their development in time.
The reconstruction of events in the history of the Near East is generally sourced from royal inscriptions,
as well as the deriving chronicles and annals recording important events, and ancient pseudo-historical literature. However, this event-based analysis often becomes overbearing, limiting the reconstruction of the
history of the Near East and obscuring, if not obliterating, a thorough understanding of cultural processes.
Reduced to a sequence of events, the history of the Near East loses its charm and interesting characteristics.
Due to considerable gaps in the available evidence, the history of the Near East thus becomes repetitive,
overall banal, too limited in its breadth, and schematic.
It is crucial to bear in mind that the use of royal inscriptions to reconstruct the sequence of events marking the political history of the Near East is based on a fundamental misunderstanding: that of considering
royal inscriptions, annals, chronicles, and even literary sources as ‘historical sources’. This kind of writing
is neither objectively nor subjectively ‘historical’. Our interest is in reconstructing past events, but ancient
sources were not written for the same purpose. From our point of view, then, these sources do not provide
us with a straightforward reconstruction. They also fail to provide all the kinds of information needed for
our historical reconstruction, unless we give up on our cultural background and historiographical interests
to take on the completely different viewpoint of ancient societies.
31
The geography of the Ancient Near East
In fact, there was no proper historiography in the Near East in the way we understand it today. Royal
inscriptions and annals were political texts aimed at celebrating specific individuals. Thus, they were part
of a propagandistic plan, rather than an accurate account of events. This, however, does not mean that in
the Near East there was no sense of history and no interest in the past, seen as the causal relation between
events and their meaning. After all, every culture has its own sense of history, and so each text, despite
being written for particular purposes, relies and transmits crucial elements of a society’s worldview. Interestingly enough, the influence of political propaganda and a specific worldview on ancient texts is often
overlooked. As a result, sources are given a historical meaning that they do not always have. For instance,
today no one would write sentences such as ‘in my reign grain was growing two meters high’ or ‘cows gave
birth to twins’ (sentences which also appear on celebratory inscriptions) for a reconstruction of economic
history. These are obvious propagandistic statements, useful for an analysis of a society’s ideology of kingship, rather than its agricultural and farming techniques. However, similar statements on military victories,
political consensus or the administration of justice are taken as genuine and used as the basis for a historical
event-based framework.
It is clear, then, that these celebratory inscriptions do not contain historical facts, but are using them
for propaganda (i.e. aimed at gaining political consensus). An immediate reaction to this would be to start
the historical reconstruction of the Near East anew, avoiding the primary sources due to their tendentious
and biased nature, to which one could easily apply the popular disclaimer ‘any resemblance to real events
is purely coincidental’.
This approach, however, would impoverish our own approach towards a historical reconstruction
of the Near East. Despite the fact that these sources cannot be considered providers of historiographical
information, they nonetheless provide useful information about the ideologies (not only political) of their
authors and their cultural context. In fact, when dealing with these sources, our task is not to understand
whether or not they recounted the truth or were based on real events. On the contrary, we have to use
this material, and in particular its cultural bias, in order to reconstruct the aims and reasons for its existence,
the range of ideas employed and the worldview they derive from and transmit. Therefore, ancient sources
primarily document ideologies, and not facts.
From this point of view, then, this kind of documentation is not an obstacle, but an enrichment of
our historical investigation. In fact, in the understanding of historical events, if one refuses to take into
consideration a recorded event because the account may be unreliable, it is still possible to recognise the
underlying reasons and political concerns surrounding its mention. Moreover, such an approach benefits
our understanding of the overall context, making the written evidence an essential source for the understanding of social structures and the set of values which a certain community responded to and identified
with. Political history should therefore not be relegated to the understanding of its events, but can and has
to aim for a systematic reconstruction. This eventually leads to its integration with cultural history, enriching the latter’s technological aspect with the knowledge of ancient ideologies.
Royal inscriptions and other texts related to the palace were written with a propagandistic tone for
clear political reasons: from legitimacy to celebration, comparison with other rulers and states, and communication. Legitimacy is a constant issue in the exercise of kingship, but is more evident in the initial
phases of a king’s reign. After all, legitimacy is a problem that affects most rulers, especially usurpers, or,
more generally, those transitional stages that cannot rely on a secure dynastic line. Therefore, legitimacy
becomes a central topic in the apologetic tone employed by usurpers on their inscriptions. Their statements
are frequently more or less extravagant justifications, which by contrast can reveal the traditional ideology
of kingship and the common means of accession to power. If the normal procedure consisted in inheriting the office through the male line (and this is frequently the case), the usurper would have attempted to
claim his descent from a former, disinherited branch of the royal family. In case the usurper lacked any such
proof of legitimacy, he would have stated his divine appointment, being the one chosen among the people
for merits that were not evident to humans. The actual legitimacy of a king would arise anyway from his
32
The geography of the Ancient Near East
rule. After all, a king that could successfully rule his state proved to his subjects that his rise to power was
legitimate. Otherwise, why would the gods have granted him success and prosperity?
Legitimacy is therefore closely linked to the celebration of power, simply because he who is able to rule
is the legitimate ruler. However, this aspect is only visible during the reign itself. Consequently, a ruler that
already managed to claim his legitimacy (through inheritance or usurpation), had to continuously demonstrate that his reign was prosperous and successful. Any aspect of kingship could therefore become a useful
means for the assertion of power. Military campaigns had to be successful, through the ruler’s prowess and
divine support. Similarly, commercial activities had to emphasise the quantity and rarity of the imported
products without mentioning exports.
In this way, the cities at the centre of one’s kingdom could be portrayed as the centre of the known world,
receiving raw materials and products, and employing all available resources for the king’s needs. Consequently, such centralisation of resources constituted proof of the ruler’s ‘universal’ control, real or potential.
Even natural phenomena (such as rain and floods, crucial for a successful harvest), despite being outside the
king’s sphere of influence, were associated with his positive influence. This is because of the common idea
that the divine governed natural phenomena. The gods were beneficial towards their communities only if the
king, as representative of the human sphere, and the community as a whole were able to please them.
The celebration of a king’s deeds was also expressed through the presentation of contrasting situations
(both in terms of time and space) to his rule. In other words, all positive qualities were located in the centre of the realm, while all negative aspects were relegated to the periphery. This mirrored the opposition
between order and chaos, civilised and barbarian, life and death, and between active players and passive
receivers of political, military, and economic achievements. At the heart of the idea of the superiority of the
centre, there was its clear link to the divine sphere. A successful king was one who could ensure positive
relations with the gods at the expense of the surrounding populations. The latter were considered to be
godless, absurdly contrary to being subjugated, and thus condemned to provide materials and workforce to
the centre. Whenever the chaotic periphery rose against the centre, the king formed a protective barrier
to ensure the safety of his subjects.
The same contrast between the positive centre and the negative periphery can be seen on a chronological level, with a tripartite division of time. First, there was the origin of the world, considered as a positive
period when the world was created by the gods and ruled by the first mythical kings and heroes. Then,
there was a negative period governed by inefficient (thus, illegitimate) successors, which brought chaos
(which should have been relegated to the periphery) to the state. The situation was only solved in the
third phase, when the celebrated king, just and successful, driven by his legitimacy of rule and his personal
strength, managed to re-establish the right relations between the human and the divine spheres. Only then
could order and prosperity return, and the king stood as a living insurance of the end of the negative phase
and the return of stability.
The ruler’s celebration was always directed towards his subjects, who could not have known what
actually happened outside the centre and were not able to make suitable comparisons, since all the information was monopolised by the ones in power. On the contrary, when diplomatic and commercial needs
required cooperation with other centres of power, the tone had to change completely. It became much
more focused on reciprocity and equality of status. In this case, the language used was one of kinship and
brotherhood, aimed at the acknowledgement of mutual interests and spheres of influence.
In these inter-state interactions, then, the preservation of one’s power was linked to the acknowledgement of the surrounding powers. The same commercial, military, and political endeavours internally
celebrated as proof of hegemonic power and the subordination of the periphery, were then externally
presented in terms of equality. There is nothing more indicative of the internal and external political ideology of a state than the possibility to compare opposing versions of the same episode in sources directed
to the subjects (royal inscriptions) and to other rulers (letters and treaties). Both versions are intrinsically biased, though in different ways: both employ facts as a way to construct the respective system of
33
The geography of the Ancient Near East
diplomatic networks, and use strong metaphors and connotations, depicting a different political situation
from the real one.
Political propaganda can therefore provide a historical framework that is coherent, maybe too coherent, despite its strongly biased tone. However, this historical framework cannot possibly be an integral part
of our own reconstruction. A political kind of discourse is intrinsically biased, mentioning certain events
and forgetting others, while emphasising or minimising important elements. In this way, it influences,
positively or negatively, historical information for its own purposes. Moreover, it always provides only the
point of view belonging to the one in power, and never that of enemies or subjects. In other words, it is
the view of the winner and never of the defeated.
Those in power effectively monopolised the means to record ideologies and historical events, thus shaping a community’s memories. The point of view of the defeated, their political strategies, and marginal
ideologies run the risk of being completely invisible in the sources, except for very few cases. As a result,
the only way to recover this information is a reversed reading of the official propaganda, paying attention to the concerns lurking behind the bold statements and the receivers of its criticism. Assurances also
inform us of opposing opinions, political dissent, and potential oppositions to the ruling power. Therefore,
through the confutation and demonisation of threats, ruling entities have involuntarily made sure that we
know about their enemies.
However, how did political propaganda reach its audience? And who exactly was its audience? It has
been often noted that in a world in which literacy (which required the knowledge of an ideographic and
syllabic writing, in use before the development of alphabetic systems) was limited to a small, specialised
group, the expression of political ideas in writing made the overall message inaccessible to a large portion of
the population, and thus somehow pointless. The real problem, however, is that today we only have access
to written sources, despite the fact that there were other means of large-scale communication that have
not survived as well. In fact, written political propaganda was only accessible to a small group of scribes,
administrators, and courtiers constituting the ruling class, in a sort of self-indoctrination process. On this
level of society, a political statement can be more complex and sophisticated, since only among the ruling
class would such a message be fully understood.
For a wider audience (such as a city’s inhabitants), there were other forms of communication, from oral
transmission to iconography and festivals. These were designed to be less complex, and easier to spread and
understand. In the case of a more marginal portion of society, such as villages outside the centre, this political message would only be delivered indirectly. In fact, it was sufficient for them to know of the presence
of a legitimate ruler at the centre of their world, loved by the gods and caring towards his people, victorious in military campaigns, as well as able to obtain from nature and men fertility, prosperity, wealth and
peace. Each layer of society, then, was reached through the appropriate channels of communication, and
the corresponding message was designed accordingly. Royal inscriptions were accessible to few privileged
individuals, but they constituted only the tip of an iceberg made of a wider political propaganda (which
was also ideological with strong religious connotations). The latter held the community together on both
a social and a political level, providing security and cohesion.
It is our task to understand the place of ideologies in the wider historical framework of the Near East,
since, unlike the study of historical events, they allow us to recognise the cultural character of ancient
communities and their values and worries. It is first necessary, however, to categorise specific ideologies
by period, area, and social context. At the same time, it is crucial to find and bear in mind the underlying
reasons, or the function, of the ideologies considered. Then, a community’s ideology needs to be convincingly linked to its social structure and material culture. This is not purely because the ideological level is
more important than other levels, but because these various levels are interrelated and influence each other
in a way which, if discovered, can become the key for the understanding of ancient cultures.
