October 14

I don't know why I'm writing this. Maybe I just need to get it out of my head. I've been feeling so stuck lately, like everything I do is just going through the motions. Wake up, commute, sit at a desk, commute back, eat dinner, sleep. I feel like I'm watching my life happen to someone else. Is this really what I wanted? I can't even remember what I used to dream about.

Today was particularly bad. I sat through a two-hour meeting that could have been an email, and I caught myself almost crying in the middle of it. Not because anything terrible happened. Just because I felt so completely, utterly empty. I looked around the room at my colleagues and wondered if any of them feel this way too. Probably not. They all seem so put together.

I keep thinking about quitting and traveling somewhere far away. Maybe Thailand, or Portugal. Somewhere warm where nobody knows my name. I could teach English or work at a hostel or just sit on a beach and read books for a year. But that's ridiculous, right? I have responsibilities. I have a career I spent years building. You can't just walk away from that because you feel a little sad.

But is it just a little sad? I've been feeling this way for months now. Maybe longer. I used to love what I do. I used to feel excited about projects and deadlines and learning new things. Now I just feel tired. Bone-deep exhausted, the kind of tired that sleep doesn't fix.

I talked to my sister on the phone last night and she said I sound different. Quieter. She asked if I was okay and I said I was fine, just busy with work. I don't know why I lied. I guess I didn't want to worry her. Or maybe I didn't want to admit out loud that something might actually be wrong.

I feel like I'm carrying something heavy all the time, even when I'm just sitting still. My chest feels tight and I can't take a full breath. I know that's probably just anxiety but knowing what it is doesn't make it go away.

Sometimes I think maybe I should talk to someone. A therapist or whatever. But then I think about how awkward that would be, sitting in a stranger's office trying to explain why I'm sad when nothing actually bad has happened to me. I have a good job, good friends, my health. What do I have to be unhappy about?

But maybe that's not how it works. Maybe you don't need a reason. Maybe some people are just wired this way, and there's something in my brain that doesn't quite work right. My mom always seemed anxious too. She worried about everything. I wonder if she ever felt this heavy.

I think I'll try to go for a walk tomorrow morning before work. Maybe that will help. And I should probably call my sister back and tell her the truth. She would want to know.

Anyway. I don't have any answers. I just needed to write this down.
